One-pager for Host Aware Stack Manager (#1138)
crossplaneio/crossplane: design/one-pager-host-aware-stack-manager.md

# Host Aware Stack Manager

* Owner: Hasan Turken (@turkenh)
* Reviewers: Crossplane Maintainers
* Status: Draft

## Terminology

* _Custom Resource Definition (CRD)_: A Kubernetes type that defines a new type
  of resource that can be managed declaratively. This serves as the unit of
  management in Crossplane.
* _Host Cluster_: A Kubernetes cluster with scheduling capabilities where Crossplane,
  Stack Manager and other stack controller pods run.

> * _Tenant Kubernetes_: A Kubernetes API instance (typically Kubernetes Apiserver + 

Author: This is also something that I am not happy with. I would like to say `Tenant Kubernetes Cluster` but it is not even a cluster. I got `Tenant Kubernetes` by dropping `Cluster`. I wish to include `Kubernetes` somewhere in the name, however, it is ok to give this details in Terminology. I'll use `Tenant Instance`, thanks!

  controller manager with minimum number of controllers enabled) that Crossplane
  controllers watch and act for Custom Resources.

## Background

Crossplane controllers manage external resources declaratively via Kubernetes Custom Resources. They do not need

>  workload scheduling capabilities and only need to have access to Kubernetes Apiserver to act on custom resources.

Reviewer: "Apiserver" --> "API Server" also :)

 Hence, it should not be mandatory to have a full Kubernetes Cluster (with scheduling capabilities) as long as 
 controllers running somewhere and configured against Kubernetes API server instance.

Stack Manager is responsible for deployment of Crossplane controllers packaged as `stacks`. Currently, it assumes it is
 the same Kubernetes API where controller pods deployed and custom resources exist which makes it mandatory to have a
 dedicated Kubernetes Cluster per Crossplane installation. 

## Goals

- Deploy multiple isolated instances of Crossplane controllers on a single Kubernetes cluster (a.k.a. Host Cluster).
- Make Stack Manager host aware so that it can deploy controller pods on Host cluster but watch and configure 
 stack controllers to watch separate Kubernetes API instances for custom resources.

## Proposal

> Stack Manager should support configuring different Kubernetes Apiservers for scheduling stack controllers and watching

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stack Manager should support configuring different Kubernetes API Servers for scheduling stack controllers and watching
```

 However, for this proposal, we need to authenticate two different Kubernetes API's inside the stack manager pod and
 we can only use `in cluster config` for one of them and will take a `kubeconfig` as parameter for the other.
 
Option 1 - Using `in cluster config` for Host Cluster: Host Cluster already auto-mounts service account tokens which we
 can use.
 
Option 2 - Using `in cluster config` for Tenant Kubernetes: This will be consistent with other controllers (Crossplane 
 and stack controllers).
 
To leverage existing mechanisms to authenticate to host cluster, we will use Option 1. We will define RBAC rules for
 stack manager which will be part of `crossplane-controllers` helm chart (see [packaging changes](#packaging-changes)) 
 that will be deployed into host cluster. This way, we can explicitly declare permissions of stack manager on Host
 Cluster.

#### Stack Installation

In case of a stack installation, Stack Manager should:

1. Create install job on Host Cluster and read logs of install pod from Host.

> 2. Deploy CRDs and RBAC on Tenant Kubernetes

Reviewer 2: This list should include creating the `Stack` resource (and where that would reside)

Reviewer 2: Since we moved away from owner based deletion (which didn't work anyway), a stack-manager must act on the resources of the stack. I assume the Stack resource lives in the host cluster for this reason.

Author: `Stack` resource also needs to be on Tenant Kubernetes instance. Please note, all our custom resources lives inside Tenant Instance and only workload related (i.e. generating a pod) resources (jobs, deployments) will live on host cluster.

 | Tenant Kubernetes | Host Cluster |
 | :---: | :---: |
 | Namespace / Name | Namespace / Name |
 | crossplane-system / stack-gcp | tenant-n-controllers / crossplane-system.stack-gcp |
 | dev / stack-wordpress | tenant-n-controllers / dev.stack-wordpress |

This mapping will cause a length limit to resource names as follows:

```
len(namespace) + len(resource-name) + 1 <= 253
```

Right now, this will effect:
- Install job name
- Stack controller deployment name
- Stack controller service account name

However, considering the following, this should not cause a new limitation for Crossplane:

- There are already labels holding some resource names (e.g. `core.crossplane.io/parent-name: stack-gcp`) and Kubernetes
 Labels are [limited to 63 chars](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#syntax-and-character-set)
- Kubernetes namespaces are limited to 63 chars
 
#### Stack Uninstallation

Stack manager can no longer rely on owner references for deletion of stack install jobs and controller deployments
 since stack related custom resources and jobs/deployments live in different Kubernetes Apiservers. Label based cleanup

>  will be implemented as a solution.

Reviewer 2: I'm glad you pointed this out.

It will take some retooling or atleast renaming to handle the case where the parent resource resides in another (a host) cluster.

```yaml
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: tenant-controller
  namespace: tennant-namespace
  labels:
    core.crossplane.io/parent-group: stacks.crossplane.io
    core.crossplane.io/parent-version: v1alpha1
    core.crossplane.io/parent-kind: Stack
    core.crossplane.io/parent-name: tenant-stack
    core.crossplane.io/parent-namespace: tennant-n-stacks ?
    core.crossplane.io/parent-uid: dead-beef
    core.crossplane.io/parent-cluster: ?
```

When the Stack is deleted from the Host cluster, the `DeleteAllOf` will need to know the namespace of the tenant resources, so there will need to be some hinting that _hosted_ stack is special and the tenant namespace should be parsed from the stack name.

Reviewer 2: Since we moved away from owner based deletion (which didn't work anyway), a stack-manager must act on the resources of the stack. I assume the Stack resource lives in the host cluster for this reason.

Author: I think you're assuming `Stack` lives in host cluster here. However, this is not the case as stated in previous comment (`Stack` lives in `Tenant Kubernetes Instance`) which simplifies and invalidates above mentioned problems.

Reviewer 2: Indeed. https://github.com/crossplaneio/crossplane/pull/1138#discussion_r364281011

One extra artifact that needs to deleted per Stack uninstallation is the token secret created on Host Cluster. This will
be achieved by setting owner of that secret as Stack Controller Deployment which also lives same Cluster/Namespace.

> ### Packaging Changes

Reviewer 3: I keep getting confused by this section title each time i read it, I keep thinking it is proposing changes to the Stack package format.  Can you update the section title to something like "Crossplane Installation Changes" or "Crossplane Helm Chart Changes"? 🙇

Author: Sure, done :)

We need to deploy crossplane types and roles (CRDs and RBACs) separately from Crossplane and Stack Manager pods. This
could be realized by introducing some new helm parameters to existing Crossplane helm chart, however,
[`helm 3` does not support templating in CRDs directory](https://github.com/helm/helm/issues/7083) which blocks
conditional installation.

> We will introduce following two helm (helm 3) charts:

Reviewer 3: does this change the user experience for installing Crossplane? i.e. do additional steps to install multiple helm charts get added to https://crossplane.io/docs/v0.7/install-crossplane.html?

Author: No, user experience for regular installation will not be effected.
We will keep existing helm chart (cluster/charts/crossplane) there and add two new helm charts.   In order not to keep/maintain same manifests (e.g. crossplane deployment) at different places, we will (automatically) build crossplane chart using the files living inside the new charts (e.g. crossplane-controllers/templates/deployment.yaml)

> `crossplane-types`: this is the piece that will be deployed into Tenant Kubernetes. This chart includes CRDs and

Reviewer 2: Why and how would helm be involved in priming a tenant cluster?

Could we accomplish this using only the stack-manager, each stack's list of dependencies, and a label on these blessed/core CRDs?  We could copy these host CRDs to tenants during stack install by having the install-job capture the existing CRD from the host, when listed as a dependency, and outputting it to the install-job log.

Maybe the label that permits a CRD to be copied to tenants could look like the following:
```
  labels:
   core.crossplane.io/tenant-safe: True
```

But doing this would necessitate scrubbing of preexisting core.crossplane.io labels from Stack CRDs.

Author: This is for installing CRDs currently coming with existing `Crossplane` helm chart. Right now it includes `Stack`, `StackInstall`, `ClusterStackInstall` and core Crossplane types. If we could bundle core crossplane as a stack, then it will only include stack manager types. 
Before installing any stack we need to install Stack Manager (and Crossplane Core). This installation is no longer done into a single Kubernetes, rather we need to split resource and install some to host and some to tenant. `Crossplane-types` helm chart is for the ones to be installed into Tenant.

Reviewer 2: We had a follow-up chat about this resulting in the following table, which helped clarify responsibilities for me:

Kind                  | Name                                | Place
----                  | -----                                | ------
pod                   | crossplane                           | Host (ns: ubc1234-system)
pod                   | stack-manager                        | Host (ns: ubc1234-system)
job                   | (stack installjob)                   | Host (ns: ubc1234-controllers)
pod                   | (stack controller)                   | Host (ns: ubc1234-controllers)

Kind                  | Name                                | Place
----                  | -----                                | ------
crd                   | Stack, SI, CSI                       | Tennant
Stack                 | wordpress                            | Tennant
StackInstall          | wordpress                            | Tennant
crd                   | KubernetesEngine, MysqlInstance, ... | Tennant
crd                   | GKEInstance, CloudSQLInstance, ...   | Tennant
(rbac)                  | (stack controller)                   | Tennant
(rbac)                  | (workspace owner, crossplane-admin)  | Tennant
(rbac)                  | (stack:namespace:1.2.3:admin)        | Tennant
crd                   | WordpressInstance                    | Tennant
WordpressInstance     | wp-instance                          | Tennant
KubernetesApplication | wp-instance                          | Tennant
pod                   | wp-instance (from KubernetesAplication)    | New Cluster

### Configuring a Pod against Tenant Instance API Server

A pod created inside a Kubernetes Cluster can contact Api Server as follows:

- Connection information made available with `KUBERNETES_SERVICE_HOST` and `KUBERNETES_SERVICE_PORT` environment
  variables.
- Authentication information is automatically put inside the pod at a predefined path according to assigned
  `service account`.

See [accessing the API from a pod](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/access-cluster/#accessing-the-api-from-a-pod)
for more details.

To configure a Pod against Tenant Instance API Server:

1. Set `KUBERNETES_SERVICE_HOST` environment variable in pod definition as the name of the service backed by Tenant
   Kubernetes API Server.
2. Set `KUBERNETES_SERVICE_PORT` environment variable as the port of Tenant Instance API Server, e.g. `6443`
3. To [opt out of automounting API credentials](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-service-account/#use-the-default-service-account-to-access-the-api-server)
    1. Set `spec.automountServiceAccountToken` as false
    2. Unset `spec.serviceAccountName`
    3. Unset `spec.deprecatedServiceAccount`

> 4. Mount service account token secret copied from CC to path

Reviewer 3: what does `CC` mean here? i don't see this acronym introduced earlier in the doc

Author: It was meant to be Crossplane Cluster, which is `Tenant Instance API Server` in this context. Updated accordingly.
